Let's develop a simple
RESTful microservice
in this exercise. We are going to work with
the expense-restful-service project to
implement a JAX-RS web service
using dependency injection,
using JAX-RS annotations and also
JSON-B marshaling and unmarshaling.
This first exercise is going to
be performed step-by-step in
the interactive mode as you would have
performed it in your own workstation.
In the future exercises,
I'm going to be using a little bit
more efficient mode of presentation.
So I will not be using Visual Studio Code,
focusing more on the
changes to the source code
and the way we can execute Quarkus
applications from the command line as well.
Let's start by running the lab
implement-rest start script,
which simply downloads
some files into our labs/
implement-rest/expense-restful-service directory.
So if we have a look at the
source code file structure,
we can see this is a
typical Maven project with
src/main/java the source
code located underneath
and then of course, src/main/
resources and the application
properties file located next to it.
If you open this in VSCodium,
clicking on File, Open Folder or simply
clicking Open Folder in
the Get Started tab,
pointing to the labs, implement-rest,
expense-restful-service and click OK,
it's going to be a short amount
of time during which you can
see the little circle turning
around in the bottom right corner,
progress report telling you how much
of the project has been imported.
And then finally, a pop-up bubble
notification saying that the Projects
are imported into the workspace.
You can close this. You can view the
project by clicking on view projects,
which will open the project outline.
And that means we can also close
the File Explorer and focus on
the Java project structure
here on the left-hand side.
There we go.
There's a package org.acme.rest.json
or what we will add first
is the Expense class,
which is a simple data object
model type of class.
We're going to add a method to allow
creating Expense objects from JSON data.
Note that this class does not have
a parameter, this constructor.
It just has 2 constructors which
take varying numbers of parameters.
Which means that according
to JSON-B specification,
we need to annotate 1 of the 2 with
the @JsonbCreator annotation and annotate
also the parameters of
that constructor with
any potential changes between
the JSON data structure,
attribute names, and the parameter names.
Luckily, in our case,
we do not have any changes
in parameter names that
the JSON data structure is actually
matching the names of these parameters.
So the @JsonbCreator implementation
can actually automatically
use the corresponding JSON data
structure to inject these fields.
So what we're going to do is simply
add a @JsonbCreator annotation here.
This will also automatically resolve
the type it will add it to the
list of imports at the top
and we're annotating a method.
So the constructor method that is,
which means that the JSON-B implementation
will actually immediately
know which constructor to use
when it'ss deserializing JSON string
into an instance of this class.
Now the next thing we can save this file.
The next thing we're going
to do is we're going to
annotate the ExpenseService class,
making it a CDI bean,
it's going to be an ApplicationScoped
bean so at the class level,
simply have to add an
@ApplicationScoped annotation,
making sure that it is a javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped
bean.
Finally in the ExpenseResource we will
be implementing the rest endpoints.
So we need to annotate the class
with the route path. Like this.
We need to also express that this class
will both consume and produce JSON.
So we'll use a @Produces annotation
from javax.ws.rs.core.Response
not the enterprise Produces.
We're going to use the MediaType
again from javax.ws.rs.core
and we're going to select
APPLICATION_JSON, like this.
First we're going to do the same
for the @Consumes annotations.
I'm just going to copy this parameter
and use it with the @Consumes annotation.
Note that the imports are managed
automatically by VSCodium,
so there's no need to add
them manually, you
would only have to add them manually
if you're using something other than
an IDE such as Vim or other plane editors.
In the next steps, we're going
to annotate the methods,
making them endpoints for this service.
Let's start with the list method.
The list method, according
to our specifications,
should be a simple parameter, list
GET operation.
So if someone sends a GET
request to the expenses path,
they should be able to
retrieve the list of
expenses. In the create we will express
that this is a @POST operation because
there's only a single parameter,
we do not have to annotate this as a
post parameter or any of that sort.
Any @POST method bodies automatically used
and deserialize into the
expense parameter instance.
The create method has a @POST
method associated with it,
whereas the @DELETE method will be
associated with the delete HTTP method.
Now, the UUID though,
because the @DELETE method does
not necessarily have to have
a method body, will be expressed
in the @PATH parameter.
So we're going to actually use the uuid
as the name of this path parameter.
And we'll just annotate the field
here with the @PathParam annotation,
telling the JAX-RS framework to inject
uuid parameter from the
@PATH into this method field.
Of course, I accidentally overwrote the type.
There it is, it's now back.
Lastly, the update method,
where it's going to be associated with
the @PUT HTTP method invocation.
Again, @PUT method body
will automatically be
deserialized into the
expense object instance.
Right? If we save all these
files that we've modified,
we can have a look at the Swagger
UI associated with this project.
But first we have to run it.
So either Ctrl Shift and P
or view Command Palette
will give us the ability to
Debug current Quarkus project.
Note that VSCodium is learning about
which commands from the
Palette we use most
and also which commands make
sense in the current context.
So after the first use,
when you still may have to search for
the Debug current Quarkus
project command by simply
typing debug quarkus
into the search field.
After the first time you've used it,
it shall appear closer to the top
and while we're waiting for the
Quarkus runtime to start up,
we can open up a browser
and open http://localhost
on port 8080 and point to swagger-ui.
What we see is the automatically
generated open API description
of our RESTful web service.
If we click on Get expenses method,
select, Try it out and click on Execute,
what we're going to see
is not what I expected.
There is an Internal Server Error.
We can see it's associated
with a NullPointerException,
know how nicely the error information
is actually serialized in JSON,
because we had told JAX-RS
that this method produces JSON,
so even the exception messages in JSON.
Now the NullPointerException indicates
that field that we're trying to use in
the GET method is not initialized.
Let's have a look and see why that is
so? We have a look at the
Expense list method,
which is the one that is activated
by the @GET HTTP request.
We can see that it's using
expenseService.list method.
But the ExpenseResource here,
while it declares the
ExpenseService field,
it does not initialize it.
That's because it is an injection point,
the CDI injection point,
and I forgot to add the @Inject annotation
here while I was editing the class.
So upon saving it,
I don't have to do anything
really because it's
going to be automatically reloaded.
I just have to retry the method like
clicking on Execute again. And here we go.
The Response body is an
empty JSON list because
the service is currently
not initialized, right?
What we will use now is a @PostConstruct
annotation on the service class.
So going back to the application,
going back to VSCodium and
selecting Stop Debugging,
I'm going to switch
back to ExpenseService,
close the terminal window at the bottom
and Post construct method
that we're about to add
is going to initialize the
ExpenseService with some data.
We're simply going to add method,
let's say at the top.
Like this, we're going to
market as a public void method
initData.
We don't really have to make it public.
We can just keep it
package protected or
package private as it's also known as.
We're going to add 2 sample expenses here.
So we're going to be adding
to this collection over here,
expenses.add is
what we're going to use.
new_Expense, let's say Groceries.
We're going to make it
a cash payment method.
PaymentMethod is a class that is provided
by one of our bundled dependencies.
And the amount of this expense
is going to be say $150.50.
That's the first expense
we're going to add.
The second expense is
going to be for a game,
Civilization 6,
where the payment method is obviously
going to be either credit or debit card.
Let's say it's a debit card
and it's costing us 25 bucks.
Now, for this method to actually be
invoked at the class creation time,
we need to use CDI's
@PostConstruct annotation.
Here we go, save the file.
And since I stopped the Quarkus runtime,
I didn't have to, but I chose to.
I'm just going to restart it again.
Note that I didn't have to restart
it again because of hot to replace.
So any code changes would have been
immediately activated and
reloaded in the Quarkus runtime.
Now if I go back to the browser
window and click Execute again,
I see 2 expenses,
there they are, as I've defined
in the initData method.
Let's create a new expense.
So we're going to go to the Post method,
I'm going to close the GET
method and I'm going to select
the POST expenses rest method,
select, Try it out
and in the request body which is already
populated by an example content,
I'm going to create a new expense for $10,
creationDate is something
that I'm going to remove,
going to give it a name of Foo Bar.
This is a very special
excellent chocolate bar
and I'm going to leave the
paymentMethod, at CASH.
There we go. If I click the Execute
button at the bottom,
I get a Bad Request
because the Creator parameter
uuid is missing in json document.
So that would mean that
something is wrong with
my JsonbCreator method
in the expense class.
Let's move back to
the expense code and have a look
at what I did to JsonbCreator.
Actually, my positioning of this
annotation is completely wrong.
I should have actually
created a static method.
I'm just going to put them
after the both constructors.
So the JsonbCreator is going to be for a
public static void and not
a void, public static Expense of
and then specify all the parameters that
the JsonbCreator needs in
order to invoke the constructor.
So String name one, PaymentMethod
is going to be the other one.
We have to make sure that the
names of the parameters are the
same as the rest structure,
that JSON structure.
There they are.
So these are the only 3 parameters we're going to need
necessarily to create the new expense.
And it's just got to return a new Expense
containing the name, paymentMethod.
and amount like this.
Again, we have to simply
resubmit the request because
the code change is going to
be automatically reloaded.
Note how the JSON attributes are
the same as the names of
the method parameters.
So if I do an Execute action again,
here we have the Response body which
contains our fully qualified resource and
along with the creationDate and the uuid that was assigned to this new expense.
Let's review the current list of expenses.
So moving back to the GET
method and executing it again,
we can see that now there is
the new expense also listed.
And that means we can return back to
VSCodium and select Run,
Stop Debugging.
If a prompt asks you whether you want
to terminate the quarkus dev task,
simply say yes or even as I did,
that's why I wasn't asked.
Again, remember my choice.
This brings us to the end of the exercise,
which means that we can actually close
VSCodium or just leave it
running and run the lab
implement-rest finish script,
which will clean up after our exercise.
Join us in the next video,
we're going to persist
some data using panache.